The judicial administration of France had its origin in the Feudal
System. The great nobles ruled their estates side by side with, and
not under, the King. With him the great barons exercised "high"
justice, extending to life and limb. The seigneurs and great clerics
dispensed "middle" justice and imposed certain corporal penalties,
while the power of "low" justice, extending only to the _amende_ and
imprisonment, was wielded by smaller jurisdictions.

The whole history of France is summed up in the persistent effort of
the King to establish an absolute monarchy, and three centuries were
passed in a struggle between nobles, parliaments and the eventually
supreme ruler. Each jurisdiction was supported by various methods of
enforcing its authority: All, however, had their prisons, which served
many purposes. The prison was first of all a place of detention and
durance where people deemed dangerous might be kept out of the way
of doing harm and law-breakers could be called to account for their
misdeeds. Accused persons were in it held safely until they could be
arraigned before the tribunals, and after conviction by legal process
were sentenced to the various penalties in force.

The prison was _de facto_ the high road to the scaffold on which
the condemned suffered the extreme penalty by one or another of the
forms of capital punishment, and death was dealt out indifferently by
decapitation, the noose, the stake or the wheel. Too often where proof
was weak or wanting, torture was called in to assist in extorting
confession of guilt, and again, the same hideous practice was applied
to the convicted, either to aggravate their pains or to compel the
betrayal of suspected confederates and accomplices. The prison
reflected every phase of passing criminality and was the constant
home of wrong-doers of all categories, heinous and venial. Offenders
against the common law met their just retribution. Many thousands
were committed for sins political and non-criminal, the victims of an
arbitrary monarch and his high-handed, irresponsible ministers.

The prison was the King's castle, his stronghold for the coercion and
safe-keeping of all who conspired against his person or threatened
his peace. It was a social reformatory in which he disciplined the
dissolute and the wastrel, the loose-livers of both sexes, who were
thus obliged to run straight and kept out of mischief by the stringent
curtailment of their liberty. The prison, last of all, played into the
hands of the rich against the poor, active champion of the commercial
code, taking the side of creditors by holding all debtors fast until
they could satisfy the legal, and at times illegal demands made upon
them.

Various types of prisons were to be found in France, the simpler kind
being gradually enlarged and extended, and more and more constantly
utilised as time passed and society became more complex. All had
common features and exercised similar discipline. All were of solid
construction, relying upon bolts and bars, high walls and hard-hearted,
ruthless jailers. The prison régime was alike in all; commonly
starvation, squalor, the sickness of hope deferred, close confinement
protracted to the extreme limits of human endurance in dark dungeons,
poisonous to health and inducing mental breakdown. In all prisons,
penalties followed the same grievous lines. Culprits were subjected to
degradation moral and physical, to the exposure of the _carcan_ and
pillory. They made public reparation by the _amende honorable_, were
flogged, mutilated, branded and tortured.

Prisons were to be met with throughout the length and breadth of
France. The capital had many; every provincial city possessed one or
more. In Paris the principal prisons were the two Châtelets, the gaols
and, as we should say to-day, the police headquarters of the Provost
or chief magistrate of the city. For-l'Évêque was the Bishops' court;
the Conciergerie, the guardroom of the King's palace, kept by the
_concierge_, porter or janitor, really the mayor and custodian of the
royal residence; in the Temple the powerful and arrogant military order
of the Knights Templars had its seat.

The reigning sovereign relied upon the Bastile, at first merely a
rampart against invasion and rebellion, but presently exalted into the
King's prison-house, the royal gaol and penitentiary. He had also the
donjon of Vincennes, which was first a place of defensive usefulness
and next a place of restraint and coercion for State offenders. Other
prisons came into existence later: the Madelonnettes, St. Pélagie,
Bicêtre, the Salpêtrière and St. Lazare.

All these have historic interest more or less pronounced and notable.
All in their time were the scenes of strange, often terrible episodes
and events. All serve to illustrate various curious epochs of the
world's history, but mark more especially the rise, progress,
aggrandisement and decadence and final fall of the French monarchy.